# Electrochemical Cells
Redox reactions can be used to produce electricity.
Zn --> Zn$^{2+}$ + 2e$^-$
Cu2$^{2+}$ + 2e$^-$ --> Cu
Zn + Cu$^{2+}$ --> Zn$^{2+}$ + Cu

As Zinc is the more reactive metal, and is giving away electrons, a Zinc electrode in a Zinc/Copper electrochemical cell will be negative.

The more reactive the metal, the greater potential difference it will generate.

### Structure Of An Electrochemical Cell
In an electrochemical cell, there are two metal electrodes, partially submerged in a solution of the same metal, joined by a salt bridge. The electrodes are joined by a wire.

We use a salt bridge as it allows electrons to flow through the movement of ions, essentially completing the electric circuit.

The ions in the salt bridge must not affect the concentration of oxidised/reduced species on either side in the solutions. An example we use is KCl solution. (Or potassium nitrate, as they're both very unreactive ions.)
However, very occasionally the nitrate ion will act as an oxidising agent.

We don't use KOH as Zn and Cu hydroxides are insoluble, meaning the Zinc and Copper ions will be precipitated out of the solutions.

We don't use Silver (Ag) because Ag is less reactive than Cu or Zn, and Ag would coat the Zinc electrode with a layer of silver, stopping the reaction from happening.

### How Is A Voltage Produced?
- Metals react by losing electrons to form positive metal ions.
- More reactive metals lose electrons more readily than less reactive metals.
- This means that when two different metal/metal ion electrodes are connected to form a cell, the more reactive metal forms the negative electrode.
- Electrons move from the negative electrode to the positive electrode. Why? There is a potential difference, so electrons flow from -ve to +ve.
- Reduction takes place at the positive electrode. Why? Electrons are drawn towards it, where metal ions gain electrons to form atoms and Reduction Is Gain.
- Oxidation takes place at the negative electrode. Why? Electrons flow away from it, where metal atoms lose electrons to form ions and Oxidation Is Loss.
- The greater the difference in reactivity, the more exothermic the reaction, so the greater the enthalpy change of the reaction. In a cell this energy is given out as electrical energy. Electrical energy = volts x charge, so the greater the difference in reactivity, the greater the cell voltage.

### Rechargeable Cells & Non-Rechargeable (Irreversible) Cells

- Rechargeable cells can have their reactants regenerated by applying an external d.c current at a greater voltage than the battery to drive electrons the other way and thus undo reactions (electrolysis).

##### Non-Rechargeable (Primary) Cells
- Zinc/Copper
- Zinc/Carbon (Leclanché Cell)
	- Negative electrode (cathode) of zinc, carbon rod anode.
	- NH$_4$Cl(aq) paste as electrolyte and MnO$_2$
	- If MnO2 was not added, Hydrogen would be produced by the reaction causing the cell to explode.
	- The Mn$^{2+}$ oxidises the H$_2$ to H$_2$O, and is reduced to Mn$^{4+}$ in the process.

##### Rechargeable Cells
- Lithium-Ion
	- Lithium dissolved in graphite cathode and Lithium and Cobalt Dioxide anode.
- Lead-acid (car batteries)
	- Lead and sulfuric acid.
- Nickel/Cadmium
	- NiO and Cadmium (Cd)
- Alkaline (hydrogen-oxygen) fuel cells.